---
aliases:
tags:
---
**[[SOCIO101|MAINHUB]]**

---
**Metaphors of Globalization**
Metaphors of Globalization In order for us to better understand the concept of globalization, we will utilize metaphors. Metaphors make use of one term to help us better understand another term. In our case, the states of matter – solid and liquid – will be used. In addition, other related concepts that are included in the definition such as structures and flows will be elaborated.

## Solid & Liquid
The epochs that preceded today’s globalization paved way for people, things, information and places to harden over time. Consequently, they have limited mobility. The social relationships and objects remained where they were created. Solidity also refers to barriers that prevent or make difficult the movement of things. Furthermore, solids can either be natural or man-made. Examples of natural solids are landforms and bodies of water. Man-made barriers include the Great Wall of China and the Berlin Wall. An imaginary line such as the nine-dash line used by the People’s Republic of China in their claim to the South China Sea is an example of modern man-made solid. This creates limited access of Filipino fishers to the South China Sea. Obviously, these examples still exist. However, they have the tendency to melt. This should not be taken literally, like an iceberg melting. Instead, this process involves how we can describe what is happening in today’s global world. It is becoming increasingly liquid.

Liquid, as a state of matter, takes the shape of its container. Moreover, liquids are not fixed. Liquidity, therefore, refers to the increasing ease of movement of people, things, information, and places in the contemporary world. Zygmunt Bauman’s ideas were the ones that have much to say about the characteristic of liquidity. First, today’s liquid phenomena change quickly and their aspects, spatial and temporal, are in continuous fluctuation. This means that space and time are crucial elements of globalization. In global finance, for instance, changes in the stock market are a matter of seconds. Another characteristic of liquid phenomena is that their movement is difficult to stop. For example, videos uploaded on YouTube or Facebook are unstoppable once they become viral. The so-called Internet sensations become famous not only in their homeland but also to the entire world. Finally, the forces (the liquid ones) made political boundaries more permeable to the flow of people and things. This bring us to what Ritzer regarded as the most important characteristic of liquid: it “tends to melt whatever stands in its path (especially solids).” The clearest example is the decline, if not death, of the nation-state.

Liquidity and solidity are in constant interaction. However, liquidity is the one increasing and proliferating today. Therefore, the metaphor that could best describe globalization is liquidity. Liquids do flow and this idea of flow will be the focus of the next discussion. The literature on globalization makes use of the concept of flows.

**Flows**
The previous section described the melting process of solid phenomena followed by the increase in liquidity. It is only logical to discuss the flows of liquid phenomena. Flows are the movement of people, things, places, and information brought by the growing “porosity” of global limitations. Think of the different foreign cuisines being patronized and consumed by the Filipinos. Aside from local dishes, many of us are fond of eating sushi, ramen, hamburger, and French fries – foods introduced to us by foreign cultures. Clearly, foods are being globalized. Another example of flows is global financial crises. As Landler put it: “in global financial system, national borders are porous.” This means that a financial crisis is a given country can bring ramifications to other regions of the world. An example of which is the spread of the effects of American financial crisis on Europe in 2008. The following are the other kinds of flows that can be observed today: poor illegal immigrants flooding many parts of the world, the virtual flow of legal and illegal information such as blogs and child pornography, respectively, and immigrants recreating ethnic enclaves in host countries. A concrete example is the Filipino communities abroad and the Chinese communities in the Philippines.