The "self" is the entire person of an individual and among other perspectives/definitions of it. It was discussed 2 weeks ago in the class, where all of the students were given an opinion of what really is the meaning of self. Moreover, the self is not just having some unique personalities nor an individual's IQ, it is just us (you), an entire person and especially, a living breathing human. That is capable of doing far more and great things than one could ever think of, that is the result of one's decision/experience throughout the duration of his/her life, and life itself working around everything. That is self for me, the life of a person in this world.

And yet there are others, amazing people who dedicated their life in studying and teaching others and to find the true meaning of oneself and the reason behind it. For knowing thy self, is the key to be successful at life because there is confidence when an individual is aware of his/her self, there is calmness when oneself has strong belief of his/her own. Having control of one's self is like maintaining a course through the destination on a broken road, it may not be easy but at least one is in a calm and effective state. After all, self is connected to life itself, everything that a person was/is/will be. The embodiment of all the things or everything to the person. 

Yet, even though all of those arguments and beliefs from great philosophers, were somehow thought to be true and verified. But even them as an example, do they really know themselves, not just some content but the whole self or is it some way of filling in the gap of what they are currently missing. Because to be honest, even if one could be studying about the self in several years of devoting his/her time, still he/she doesn't know himself completely because each day is a new day with random possibilities and events that will occur. Probably the reason why higher beings were made to fill in that 'gap' we are all trying to answer. For anything that is beyond our comprehension, is passed on to the belief/s that someday when the body dies, the soul will leave the body and finally seek out the truth of everything there is, even the unknown. 
<br>

#### **Assignment #3: Different Perspectives on the “Self”**
We now know the Philosophy of Pre-Socratics and the Ancient Triumvirate(Socrates, Plato, Aristotle). Please research and provide the ff:
- Medieval Philosophical perspectives of the self
- Modern Philosophical perspectives of the self
- Post modern Philosophical perspectives of the self
- Eastern Philosophical perspectives of the self