---
aliases:
tags:
---
**[[HIST101PRELIMch14#^d45bf8|BACK]]**

---
## Excerpt from "Relation of the Conquest of the Island of Luzon"
De Goiti found the port and town of Maynilad located along the mouth of the Pasig River. Peace was negotiated between the Spaniards and the natives of Maynilad led by its Muslim chief Raja Soliman but hostilities soon ensued and the town was sacked by the Spaniards with the help of their Visayan allies. Legazpi himself transferred to Maynilad in 1571 and made it the capital of the new colony. This was followed by the pacification of the surrounding lowland communities. They also encountered several Chinese traders in the area which contributed to the decision to transfer to Manila. The trade with China would prove economically crucial to the Spanish colony. Manila would eventually develop into a city within walls or Intramuros where most of the Spanish residents lived. It received the title Muy Insigne y Siempre Leal Ciudad (Eminent and Ever Loyal City) from Spain.

**Primary Source**
The master-of-camp set sail for the island of Luzon, or rather the port and village of Manila, which was said to be large and very strong, It is but just to say that it is not more than one-tenth as large and as strong as in Nueva España and in other places it is reported to be; and yet, in comparison with the natives of this land, the inhabitants of Manilla were more powerful, for they had twelve pieces of small and inferior artillery and a few culverins, with such other weapons as I have already mentioned. This village of Manilla is situated on a tongue of land extending from east to west between the river and the sea, and a fort had been built on the extreme western end of this peninsula at the entrance to the port The sea makes a very large harbor about thirty leagues in circumference; and bordering upon this harbor are many villages, among which is that of Manilla Manila is now a Spanish city. founded in the name of his Majesty by the governor Miguel López de Legazpi. The captain- general and Captain Juan de Sauzedo having arrived in view of this port of Manilla, entered in peace, and under the safe-conduct of two native chiefs of the said village. One of these was called Laya, lately deceased, who died a Christian; the other was called Raxa Solimán. With these two chiefs were drawn up articles of peace, although Raxa Solimán was suspected to lack of good-faith while Laya was always to be trusted, even until the day of his death. While these peaceful negotiations were in progress between the master- of-camp and the two chiefs above-mentioned, there collected a large number of natives of various classes; and yet there were not so many as was reported in Nueva España, where it was claimed that there were in all eighty thousand Moros in this village of Manilla, when this event took place. Indeed, one should subtract seventy-eight thousand from the eighty thousand mentioned, in order to arrive at the two thousand which, there might have been from the said village of Manilla and those in its environs, including the women and children, who were present in great numbers. Now, as I say. these negotiations being in progress, some of the natives desired peace and others war; for indeed the Indians had some pride, and it seemed to them that the Spaniards were very few and could be easily slain, even if only with clubs. Thus, it was for that. at the end of three days during which these friendly negotiations continued (because it was impossible to come to an agreement, or conclude them), one day at ten o'clock, on the twenty-fourth day of the month of May of the year above mentioned, the Indians, who were in the fort, began to discharge their artillery at two of our ships, which were moored very nearby. The master- of-camp was ashore with eighty soldiers, close to this same fort, on a small piece of level ground. The fort was made of palm-tree logs surmounting a very narrow mound, and the pieces of artillery protruded from immense gaps by which soldiers could enter at will, as I have said above. Now when the Moros began to violate the articles of peace and friendship which the master-of-camp had made with them, the latter was deeply concerned; for he had lor he had great fear, because the enemy were in force. Yet, when he saw that the battle had broken out, he put on his helmet, and commenced to encourage his soldiers, telling them that they should acquit themselves as Spaniards, and as they had always done in critical times. Thereupon he ordered them to attack the fort through the openings made for the artillery, and it pleased God that not one of the gunners had the courage to fire his piece; and so great was the confusion, that they trembled upon seeing the Spaniards enter with so great spirit, and, turning their backs, abandoned themselves to flight, and slew one another in their mad rush for freedom. The master-of-camp, realizing that the village was large and rich, and that the victory was his by the grace of God, for the soldiers were few, feared lest our soldiers should, through greed, set to plundering the houses and become widely scattered; and that, if the enemy should see them thus scattered, they would return and attack them when unable to reunite. That he might avoid this danger he ordered the village to be set on fire, and the soldiers to collect upon the promontory, which order was obeyed. In this manner, as related, it befell the master-of- camp, and the victory was obtained over those of Manilla.
**Source: The Philippine Islands 1493-1803Vol.3 (1569-1576)**