---
cssclass:
aliases:
tags:
---
**[[HIST101#Semifinal|MAINHUB]]**

---
## The Propaganda Movement
$\quad$In order to understand and appreciate the Propaganda Movement, it is important to consider the Philippine conditions in the nineteenth century. The opening of Philippine ports to world trade during the first half of the century had set into motion significant political and <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">socioeconomic changes</mark>. There was economic development because of the export demand of certain crops like sugar, tobacco, and abaca and the entry of foreign capital which stimulated local agriculture. This, in turn, gave rise to the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">land-estates or _haciendas_</mark> dedicated to the cultivation of cash crops such as sugar, rice, and abaca. Many of these haciendas were owned by the friar orders who hired <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">_inquilinos_ or tenants</mark> to manage their lands. The new system launched a wealthy class of Filipino *haciendero* and *inquilino* families who were mostly Chinese mestizos and natives.

$\quad$The educational reform of **1863** opened institutions of higher learning in the colony to all who can afford it. This reform gave the rich mestizos and natives the opportunity to send their children to the schools and the colleges in Manila and, if possible, to Europe. Their distinguished education and considerable wealth differentiated these ilustrados from the masses of indios. They would lead the criticism against the colonial government which was then known for its corruption and incompetence. They would exert efforts to propose political and economic reforms beneficial to the colony.

$\quad$The <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">Catholic Church</mark> and <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">friar orders</mark> in particular, which have long exercised great influence over colonial affairs, would be <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">another target of the liberal-minded Filipinos</mark>. Within the Church, however, there was also <mark class="hltr-lightblue">a movement for change</mark> led by **Fr. Pedro Pelaez** and later **Fr. Jose Burgos** demanding for e<mark class="hltr-lightblue">quality of treatment</mark> between Filipino secular priests and Spanish regular clergy; and the turnover of the administration of local parishes to the hands of the Filipino priests. This became known as the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">secularization issue</mark>. Unfortunately, the movements for liberal reform and secularization would be d<mark class="hltr-lightgreen">estroyed by state repression</mark> which followed the **[[HIST101CaviteMutiny|Cavite Mutiny of 1872]]**. Prominent Filipinos including lawyers, businessmen, and priests were implicated as conspirators of the revolt in **Cavite**. Many were imprisoned and exile while some were executed the fate that befell the Gomburza priests. These events would awaken the consciousness of the younger generation who witnessed the tragic fate of their teachers, families, and friends; and would later bring the struggle for change to Spain.

$\quad$The **Propaganda Movement** was essentially <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">a Filipino-led campaign for reform and assimilation which can be dated from the appearance of the reformist bilingual newspaper _**Diariong Tagalog**_ in **1882**</mark> to the demise of the publication _**La Solidaridad**_ in **1895**. Filipino students and professional’s then living in Spain engaged in public speeches, political lobbying and petitions, and publication of books, pamphlets; and articles in order to expose the conditions in the Philippines and advocate necessary reforms. Among the main organizers and contributors to the movement were renowned Filipino ilustrados such as **Jose Rizal, Marcelo H. Del Pilar, Mariano Ponce, Graciano Lopez Jaena, Jose Marie Panganiban** and **Antonio Luna**. Composed of young, wealthy, and brilliant mestizos and natives who went to study or live in Spain, this generation of intellectuals, according to historian **John Schumacher** was responsible for the “<mark class="hltr-lightgreen">creation of a Filipino consciousness</mark>” which they articulated in their writings and which influenced many minds in the Philippines. Their nationalist ideas and ideals would ultimately inspire and make possible the revolution of **1896**.

>[!aside|left]+
> The <u>Philippines</u> was opened to foreign commerce after the abolition of the **China-Manila-Acapulco** trade or popularly known as the **Galleon trade in 1813**. It was the colony's sole external trade during the last two and a half centuries.

$\quad$In the end, the <mark class="hltr-lightred">campaign proved to be a failure as basic rights and privileges such as freedom of speech, the press, and association and representation to the Cortes</mark> (the highest lawmaking body in Spain) continued to be denied to the Filipinos-despite the tireless striving of Filipino Propagandists and their Spanish sympathizers. Several important circumstances contributed to this failure. One is the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">political instability in Spain caused by the struggle for dominance between the Liberals and Conservatives</mark> which resulted in abrupt changes within the ruling government. Mired in its own internal predicaments, the Spanish government paid little attention to the concerns of its overseas colonies and depended upon the influence of the religious orders. In relation to this, one of the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">primary objectives of the Filipino Propagandists was to destroy the power and prestige of the friar class</mark>. The friar themselves were engaged in counter propaganda, funding newspapers which answered the accusations of the Filipinos. Another factor was the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">personal rivalries</mark> among the ranks of the Filipino ilustrados the most unfortunate of which was the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">break between Rizal and Del Pilar</mark>. In **1892**, Rizal proceeded to return to the Philippines disillusioned with the reform campaign in Spain. All things considered, however, the movement did succeed in igniting a sense of national identity and unity among Filipinos in Spain that would soon reach the motherland and spark the revolution. By **1896**, the principal figures of the movement were already dead. **Lopez Jaena** and **Del Pilar** <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">died poor and hungry</mark> in Barcelona while **Rizal**, after enduring years of exile, <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">was convicted and executed by firing squad</mark> on **December 30, 1896**.
- [[HIST101SEMIFINALch11|Excerpt from La Solidaridad]]
- [[HIST101SEMIFINALch12|Excerpt from “The Philippines in Distress”]]
- [[HIST101SEMIFINALch13|Excerpt from Monastic Supremacy in the Philippines]]
- [[HIST101SEMIFINALch14|Excerpt from “On the Indolence of the Filipinos” ]]

>[!INFO|clean no-i ttl-c] [[HIST101SEMIFINALch1Timeline|Timeline]]

### Chapter Summary
-   Several significant events and trends during the nineteenth century provide the background for the Propaganda Movement. These are :
	1. World trade and the commercialization of agriculture;
	2. Rise of a wealthy class of mestizos and natives;
	3. Spread of education which produced the ilustrados;
	4. Secularization issue in the catholic church and
	5. Cavite mutiny and the execution of the Gomburza
-   The **Propaganda Movement** was <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">a peaceful campaign</mark> for reforms led by Jose Rizal, Marcelo H. del Pilar, Mariano Ponce, Graciano Lopez Jaena and other Filipinos. Unfortunately, it <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">failed</mark> to attain essential rights and privilege for the Filipinos because of the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">turbulent politics in Spain</mark>, the influence of the friar orders, the insufficiency of funds to sustain the movement and internal disputes among Filipino leaders.
-   The emergence of a Filipino national consciousness was the most important legacy of the Propaganda Movement.