---
cssclass:
aliases:
tags:
---
**[[HIST101SEMIFINALch1|BACK]]**

---
by: **Jose Rizal**
## Excerpt from “On the Indolence of the Filipinos”
**Jose Rizal** was born to <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">a wealthy inquilino family</mark> on **June 19, 1861** in **Calamba, Laguna**. He was educated by the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">Jesuits at the Ateneo de Manila</mark> and <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">eventually</mark> enrolled at the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">University of Santo Tomas</mark>. In **1882**, without the knowledge of his parents, he sailed for Spain where e continued and finished his medical studies. He joined the <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">reform movement</mark> as its celebrated intellectual leader and moral guide. He published his first novel, _**Noli Me Tangere**_ ( _Touch Me Not_ ), in **1887**. The Noli, which <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">expose the social ills</mark> afflicting colonial Philippines, made Rizal a hero in the eyes of liberal progressive Filipinos and an archenemy of the friars who banned the work in the country. He travelled across the European continent learning languages and meeting European scholars studying the Philippines, among whom was the Austrian **Ferdinand Blumentritt**. In **1889**, as part of his efforts to enlightens the Filipinos about their past, he republished **Antonio Morga’s Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas** (Events in the Philippine Islands) with his annotations. He also contributed essays to<mark class="hltr-lightgreen"> La Solidaridad such as “Sobre la indolencia de los Filipinos”</mark> (“On the indolence of the Filipinos”) and <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">“Filipinas dentro de cien anos”</mark> (“The Philippines, a Century Hence”). After the publication of his second novel, _**El Filibusterismo**_ ( _The Subversive),_ Rizal decided to return to the Philippines to put his ideas into reality. He organized a society exclusively for Filipinos, <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">La Liga Filipina (The Filipino League), on **July 3, 1892**</mark>. After <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">three days</mark> of the society’s establishment, he was arrested and exiled to Dapitan, Zamboanga which <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">lasted for four years</mark>. In 1896, he was permitted to serve as a military doctor to Cuba but with the outbreak of the Katipunan uprising, he was arrested again and sent back to the Philippines. He was tried in court and pronounced guilty of treason and sedition. <mark class="hltr-lightred">Rizal was executed</mark> on **December 30, 1896** in **Bagumbayan, Manila**.

**Primary Source**
The warm climate requires quiet and rest for the individual, just as cold incites him to work and to action. For this reason the Spaniard is more indolent than the French, and the French more so than the German. They very Europeans who accuse the peoples of the colonies of indolence (and I'm no longer referring to the Spaniards but also to the Germans and Englishmen). How do they live in the tropical countries? Surrounded by many servants, never walking but riding, needing servants not only to remove their shoes but even to fan them. Man can live under any climate if he will only adapt himself to its requirements and conditions. What kills the European in the warm countries is the abuse of alcohol, the desire to live as in his own country under another sky and another sun. We the inhabitants of tropical countries live well in the Torrid Zone if they would only get rid of their prejudices.

The fact is that in the tropical countries severe work is not a good thing as in cold countries, for there it is annihilation, it is death, it is destruction. Nature, as a just mother knowing this, has therefore made the land more fertile, more productive, as a compensation. An hour's work under that burning sun and in the midst of pernicious influences coming out of an active nature is equivalent to a day's work in a temperate climate; it is proper then that the land yield a hundredfold!... Who is the indolent one in the offices in Manila? Is it the poor clerk who comes in at eight in the morning and leaves at one o'clock in the afternoon with only his parasol and copies and writes and works by himself and for his chief, or is it his chief who comes in a carriage at ten o’ clock, leaves before twelve, reads his newspaper while smoking with his feet stretched out on a chair or a table, or speaking ill of everything with his friends? Who is the indolent one, the indio coadjutor, poorly paid and badly treated, who has to visit all the indigent sick living in the country, or the friar curate who gets fabulously rich, goes about in a carriage, eats and drinks well, and does not trouble himself unless he can collect excessive fees?

We find the tendency to indolence very natural and we have to admit it and bless it, because we cannot alter natural laws, and because without it the race would have disappeared. Man is not a brute, he is not a machine. His aim is not merely to produce despite the claim of some white Christians who wish to make of the colored Christian a kind of motive power somewhat more intelligent and less costly than steam. His purpose is to seek happiness for himself and his fellow men by following the road towards progress and perfection.

The evil is not that a more or less latent indolence exists, but that it is fostered and magnified. Among men, as well as among nations, there exist not only aptitudes but also tendencies toward good and evil. To foster the good ones and aid them, as well as correct the bad ones and repress them would be the duty of society or of governments, if less noble thoughts did not absorb their attention. The evil is that indolence in the Philippines is a magnified indolence, a snow-ball indolence, if we may be permitted the expression, an evil which increases in direct proportion to the square periods of time, an effect of misgovernment and backwardness, as we said and not a cause of them.

How strange it is that the Philippines should remain poor despite its very fertile soil when history tells us that the most flourishing countries today date their development and well-being from the day they got their liberty and civil right? The most commercial and most industrious countries have been the freest countries, France, England, and the United States prove this. Hong Kong, which is not worth the most insignificant island of the Philippines, has more commercial activity than all our islands put together because it is free and well governed.

The pernicious influence of the rulers, that of surrounding themselves with servants and despising physical or manual labor as unworthy of the nobility and aristocratic pride of the heroes of so many centuries; those<mark class="hltr-lightgreen"> lordly manners</mark> that the Filipinos have translated into <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">Tila ka Kastila</mark> (You’re like a Spaniard); and the desire of the ruled to be the equal of the rulers, if not entirely, at least in manners-all these naturally produced aversion to activity and hatred or fear of work.

>[!INFO|alt-co]+
> Jose Rizal and Ferdinand Blumentritt's correspondence started in **1886**. Rizal, who was in Germany during this time, read the books of Ferdinand Blumentritt on the Philippines and sent him a letter and book about the Tagalog language to which the latter reciprocated with two books of his own. Rizal later decided to visit Blumentritt in **1887**. The two got along very well with each other because of their shared scholarly interests on the Philippines. <u>Blumentritt also contributed articles to the Filipino newspaper La Soladaridad</u>. Their intellectual and personal friendship lasted until Rizal's death in **1896**.

Moreover, why work? Many Filipinos said to themselves. The curate says that the rich man will not go to heaven. The rich man on earth is exposed <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">to all kinds of vexation</mark>, <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">to all kinds of trouble</mark>: to be appointed cabeza de Barangay (Head of the Barangay), to be deported if an uprising breaks out, to be forced to lend money to the military chief of the town, who, in order to pay you favors received, will seize your workmen and farm animals to compel you to beg him tor clemency and thus very easily pays up. Why be rich? So that all officers of justice would keep a lynx eye on your actions; so that at the least mistake they would stir enemies against you and indict you and concoct a labyrinthine and complicated story about you from which you can only get out, not by <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">Ariadne’s thread</mark> but <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">by Dana's shower of gold</mark> and still be grateful if you are not afterwards set aside for some other case if need be. The <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">Indio</mark>, whom they pretend to regard as an <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">imbecile</mark>, is not so much that he does not understand that it is ridiculous to work himself to death and live as he did. A saying of his is that swine is cooked in its own fat and as among his bad qualities, he has the good one of applying to himself all the reproaches and censures that he hears, he prefers to remain miserable and indolent to playing the role of the wretched pachyderm.

Along with gambling which breeds dislike for steady and difficult work by its promise of easy money and its appeal to the emotions, with the lotteries, with the prodigality and hospitality of the Filipinos went also, to swell this train of misfortunes, the religious functions-the large number of fiestas, the lengthy Masses at which women spent their whole mornings, the novenae, their afternoons and the processions and rosaries, their nights. Consider that lack of capital, lack of means, paralyzes all activity and you will see why the Indio must perforce be indolent; for if any money might remain to him from the trials, imposts exactions, he would have to give it to the curates tor bulls, scapularies, candles novenae etc.

The facility with which individual liberty is curtailed, the endless worry of all people knowing that They are able to a secret report, an administrative action, and to be accused of being a **filibustero**(<mark class="hltr-lightgreen">rebel</mark>) or a suspect an accusation which need not be proven or is the presence of the accuse necessary to produce the desired result, the lack of confidence in the future, the uncertainty of reaping the fruit of one's labor, as in a city in the grip of an epidemic where every individual yields to fate, shuts himself in his house or goes about amusing himself trying to spend the few days that remain of his life in the least disagreeable way possible.

The apathy of the government itself toward everything pertaining to commerce or agriculture contributes not a little to foster indolence. There is no encouragement of all other for the manufacturer or the farmer the government gives no aid either when the harvest is poor when the locusts lay waste on the fields, or when a typhoon destroys in its path the wealth of the land, nor does it bother to seek a market for the products of its colonies.

The <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">education</mark> of the Filipino from birth until the grave is <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">brutalizing, depressing, and and anti-human</mark> (the word inhuman is not expressive enough, whether the Academy approves it or not let it go). Undoubtedly, the government, some Jest priests and some Dominicans the **Fr. Benavides**, have done much by founding colleges, primary schools, etc. But this is not enough their effect turns out to be useless. For five or ten years the youth comes in contact with books, chosen by the very same priests who boldly declare that it is <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">evil for the Filipinos to know Castilian</mark>, that the Filipino should not be separated from his carabao, that he should not have any further ambition, etc. During these five or ten years the majority of students have grasped nothing more than that no one understands what the books say, not even perhaps the professors themselves. During these five or ten years the students have to contend with the daily preaching that lowers human dignity, gradually or brutally killing their self-respect-that eternal, tenacious, persistent effort to humble the native, to make him accept the yoke, to reduce him to the level of a beast, an effort supported by some private individuals, writers or not.. Deprive a man then of his dignity, and you not only deprive him of his moral stamina but you also render him useless even to those who want to make use of him. Every being in creation has his spur, his mainspring; men's is his self-respect, take it away from him and he becomes a corpse; and he who demands activity from a corpse will find only worms.

Alas! The whole misfortune of the Filipinos of today is that they have become brutes only half-way The Filipino is convinced that to be happy it is necessary for him to lay aside his dignity as a rational being, to hear Mass, to confess, obey the curate, believe whatever he is told, pay whatever is demanded of him, pay and always pay, toil, suffer and keep silent, without aspiring to know, to understand not even Castilian, without separating himself from his carabao, as the friars impudently say, without protesting against an injustice, against an arbitrariness, against an assault, against an insult that is, <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">not to have a heart, brain, or gall-a creature with arms and a purse full of gold-that's the ideal Indio!</mark>

In the preceding chapter we outlined the causes proceeding from the government which foster and maintain the evil we are discussing. Now it behooves us to analyze those emanating from the people. Peoples and governments are correlated and complementary. A <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">stupid government</mark> is an anomaly among a righteous people, just as a corrupt people cannot exist under rulers and wise laws. Like people, like government, we will say, paraphrasing a popular adage.

All these causes can be reduced to two classes: **Defects of education** and **Lack of national sentiment**.

The <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">reasons</mark> arising from the absence of national sentiment are even more lamentable and more transcendental.
Convinced through insinuation of his inferiority his mind bewildered by his education-the brutalization we discussed above can be called education with only his racial susceptibility and poetical imagination remaining in him, the Filipino in the exchange of usages and ideas among the different nations, allows himself to be guided by his fancy and self-love. It is sufficient that a foreigner praise to him the imported merchandise and find fault with the native product for him to shift hastily, without thinking that everything has its weak side and the most sensible custom appears ridiculous to the eyes of those who do not follow it. They dazzled him with tinsel, with strings of multi-colored glass beads, with noisy rattles, shining mirrors, and other trinkets, in exchange he gave his gold, his conscience, even his liberty. He changed his religion for the rituals of another religion, the convictions and usages dictated by his climate and by his necessities for other usages and other convictions which have grown under another sky and under a different inspiration. His spirt, disposed to everything which seemed to be good, then was transformed according to the taste of the nation that imposed upon his its God and its laws and as the trader with whom he dealt did not bring along the useful won implements, the hoes to the fields, but stamped papers, crucifixes bulls, and prayer books as he did not have for an ideal and prototype the tanned and muscular laborer but the aristocratic lord, caned in a soft litter, the result was that the imitative people became clerks, devout, prayer-loving acquired ideas of luxurious and ostentatious living without improving correspondingly their means of subsistence.

Moreover, the lack of national sentiment breeds another evil which is the scarcity of any opposition to the measures that are prejudicial to the people and the absence of any initiative that will redound to their welfare. A man in the Philippines is only an individual he is not a member of a nation. He is deprived of the right of association and therefore he is weak and inert. The Philippines is an organism whose cells must have no arterial system to water them, nor a nervous system to register their impressions; nonetheless these cells must yield their product, get it where they can if they perish, let them perish. In the opinion of some persons. This is desirable so that a colony may remain a colony. Perhaps they are right, but not that a colony may flourish.

In addition to this, love of peace and horror many have of accepting the new few administrative that fall to the lot of the Filipinos on account of the troubles and annoyances they bring them, lead to the appointment of the most stupid and incompetent men to municipal posts-officials who submit to everything who endure all the caprices and exactions of the curates and their superiors. And with imbecility in the lower echelons, and ignorance end giddiness in the upper, with the frequent changes and endless apprenticeships, with great fear and numerous administrative obstacles, with a voiceless people that have neither initiative nor cohesion, with government employees, who nearly all strive to amass a fortune and return to their country with people who exist with great difficulty from birth, to create prosperity to develop agriculture and industry, to establish enterprises and associations, which prosper in difficulty even in tree and well-organized countries, cannot be expected to happen in the Philippines.

<mark class="hltr-lightgreen">Without education and liberty</mark>--the soil and the sun of mankind--no reform is possible, no measure can give the desired result. This does not mean that we should first demand for the Filipino the education of the sage and imaginable liberties before putting a hoe in his hand or placing him in a workshop; such a pretension would be an absurdity and vain folly. What we want is that no obstacles be placed on his way, not to increase the many that the climate and the situation of the islands already create for him, not to begrudge him educational opportunities for fear that when he becomes intelligent he will separate from the colonizing nation or demand rights to which he is entitled. Since some day or other he will become enlightened, whether the Government likes it or not, let his enlightenment be as a gift given to him and not as a spoil of war. We <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">wish</mark> the policy to be sincere and consistent or highly civilizing, without petty reservations, without distrust, without fear nor misgivings, wishing the good for the sake of the good, civilization for the sake of civilization... <mark class="hltr-lightgreen">let the Government attend more to material interests rather than to the interests of the four friar corporations</mark>; let it send out intelligent employees to develop industry, just judges, all well paid, so that they would not pilfer or be venal, and lay aside all religious pretext. This policy has the advantage in that while it may not completely lull to sleep the instinct of liberty. yet the day that the mother country lose her colonies she will at least keep the gold amassed and not regret having ungrateful children.
**Source: Jose Rizal: Political and Historical Writing.**