---
aliases:
tags:
---
**[[HIST101PRELIMch14#^83e861|BACK]]**

---
## Excerpt from "Instruction to Miguel Lopez de Legazpi" from the Royal Audiencia of New Spain"
King Philip II, one of the most powerful European monarchs of his time, decided to relinquish his claims to the Moluccas to Portugal and colonize the Philippines instead. An expedition under the leadership of Miguel Lopez de Legazpi was organized in Mexico. It set sail on November 20, 1564 from the port of Navidad with instructions handed by the Royal Audiencia of Mexico. Eventually, the Philippines would be ruled from Mexico, also known as New Spain, a viceroyalty of the Spanish empire. These instructions are significant because they express the intentions of the Spaniards and allows us to know the procedures and precautions followed by the Spanish voyagers. The expedition reached Samar on February 14, 1565.Legazpi and his crew went around the Visayas Islands in the central region of the archipelago and were met by the natives with suspicion and indifference. However, in the island of Bohol, Legazpi performed the blood compact with chief Sikatuna which signified a friendly relationship. Miguel Lopez de Legazpi eventually became the first governor-general of the Philippines.

**Primary Source**
"What seems best for the service of God, our Lord, and ourselves, and with the least possible cost to our estate; and therefore, I order you, by virtue of your commission to make the said discoveries by sea. that you shall despatch two ships... for the discovery of the western islands toward the Malucos. You must order them to do this according to the instructions sent you, and you shall stipulate that they try to bring some spice in order to make the essay of that traffic; and that, after fulfilling your orders, they shall return to that Nueva Espana, which they must do, so that it may be known whether the return voyage Is assured." These ships must not enter any islands belonging to the king of Portugal, but they shall go to other nearby islands, such as the Phelipinas and others, which lie outside the above agreement and within our demarcation, and are said likewise to contain spice, "The necessary artillery, articles of barter. etc., will be sent from the India House of Trade in Seville. The viceroy must issue instructions to the vessels that they "must not delay in trading and bartering, but return immediately to Nueva Espana, for the principal reason of this expedition is to ascertain the return voyage."

"But you shall enter other islands contiguous to them, as for instance the Filipinas, and others outside the said treaty, and within his majesty's demarcation, and which are reported also to contain spice.

"When you have arrived at the said Filipinas Islands, and other islands contiguous to them and the Malucos, without however entering the latter,...you shall try to discover and examine their ports, and to ascertain and learn minutely the settlements therein and their wealth; the nature and mode of life of the natives; the trade and barter among them, and with what nations; the value and price of spices among them, the different varieties of the same, and the equivalent for each in the merchandise and articles for exchange that you take from this land, and what other things may be advantageous. You shall labor diligently to make and establish sound friendship and peace with the natives, and you shall deliver to their seigniors and chiefs, as may seem best to you, the letters from his majesty that you carry with you lor them... You must represent to them his majesty's affection and love for them, giving them, a few presents... and treating them well. And you may exchange the articles of barter and the merchandise that you carry for spice, drugs, gold, and other articles of value and esteem. ... And if, in your judgment. the land is so rich and of such quality that you should colonize therein, you shall establish a colony in that part and district that appears suitable to you, and where the firmest friendship shall have been made with you, and you shall affirm and observe inviolably this friendship."
**Source: The Philippine Islands 1493-1803 Vol. ll(1521-1569)**

Legazpi arrived in the island of Cebu on April 27,1565.He defeated the recalcitrant Cebuanos andestablished his settlement there, calling it Nombrede Jesus after a wooden image of the holy childwas discovered by one of his men. Due to lack offood and basic provisions, he transferred camp tothe nearby island of Panay and from there, sentthe master-of-camp, Martin de Goiti to explore thenorthern region of Luzon.