**Juan Crisóstomo Ibarra y Magsalin (Ibarra)**
A wealthy young man of mixed Spanish and Filipino ancestry who has recently returned to the Philippines from Europe after spending seven years studying abroad. Ibarra is cultured and well-respected, though the friars in his hometown of San Diego are suspicious of him. This is because his father Don Rafael was recently imprisoned and labeled a subversive and heretic, a sentence that eventually led to his death in jail. Ibarra learns of this on his first night back in the Philippines. Hoping to carry out his father’s dreams, he later decides to build a secular school in San Diego, one that remains uninfluenced by overzealous friars like Father Dámaso and Father Salví, Ibarra’s two primary adversaries. Unfortunately, building the school proves a difficult task due to the fact that Father Salví works together with a number of Ibarra’s enemies to frame him as a conspirator against the government, ultimately forcing him to flee San Diego as an outlaw revolutionary. This means leaving behind the love of his life, María Clara, whom he was originally supposed to marry.

Ibarra is a politically important character because Rizal uses him to voice ideas regarding colonialism and the nature of power in the Philippines. For the majority of the novel, Ibarra believes that, although the Catholic friars and the Spanish government are corrupt, they provide the Philippines with valuable support. In contrast to his friend Elías (a more drastic revolutionary who wants to overthrow the country’s prevailing power structures), Ibarra insists upon reforming the Philippines from the inside out, working with the friars and Spanish officials to bring about positive change without dismantling the system entirely. However, by the end of the novel, once Ibarra is branded a heretical subversive, his ideas about reform and revolution begin to align with Elías’s more radical theories.